Introduction
The concept of ego depletion should be brought in at this juncture, because it matters to the experience we have of relating our individual experiences to the wider world. Psychologists as early as Freud and as recently as Baumeister have posited that an individual must expand some energy in order to exercise conscious volition, but the nature of this energy has been only vaguely addressed [1]. Strong evidence for somekind of energy being required in order to exercise conscious volition has been repeatedly demonstrated, but beyond a controversial link to blood glucose levels [2] there have been few attempts to propose a model for this volitional energy.
Ego depletion has not been studied as much as one might expect for such an important concept, One factor in this may be the difficulty involved in properly defining what constitutes an individual in the context of volition and willpower. Nonetheless, the presence of such energy is fairly easy to notice with an ordinary amount of interoception. Most of us have an experience of using willpower on a task like making a decision or overcoming procrastination, only to find ourselves having more difficulty exercising the same self-control in a similar task later. The expansion of energy from the first task is referred to as ego depletion. 
Compare this experience with the ‘transition energy’ proposed in part 1. This energy, associated with a transition amplitude, is associated with the time to decoherence of a quantum system. If there is no energy of this nature present, the system remains ‘locked’ in place, unable to overcome the quantum Zeno effect. The greater the difference in states at either end of the time dimension of a holon, the greater the hypothesized transition energy needs to be.
This has definite parallels with the energy expanded during ego depletion. The ability to overcome both internal and external conflicting motivations requires an internal coherence – in psychology this coherence is figurative, as we require a ‘coherent’ mental state without internal dissonance to succeed at acts of willpower. In quantum systems, if we think of a transition as happening when initial and subsequent states entangle with one another, we can speak of literal coherence as being necessary for transition energy to be expanded. As it is expanded, it exchanges information with its environment, much as a quantum system tends towards equilibrium with its environment. Once there is no practical difference between the individual and its environment, there is no energy for the individual to make a change across a temporal holon. There may of course be enough energy of a different kind for changes to propagate further, but they would be predictable to the environment once the holon has exchanged sufficient information with it. A wave pattern is only unpredictable before it is measured, once it collapses it follows predictable rules – there is no transition energy that can be expanded to cause a change that cannot be predicted with arbitrary accuracy.
Although the behaviour of large agents like humans are no doubt very different from those of quantum systems like single electrons, there are clear parallels between the randomness of a quantum state in superposition and a human making an autonomous decision. To the degree that a person has free choice in some matter, it is impossible to accurately predict what their choice will be. Executive function seems like a macroscopic version of the transition energy proposed in part 1: it requires an internal coherence and separation from the environment. Overcoming resistance in the environment to enact change involves intense exchange of information, which causes the separation to become less pronounced. Allowing for conflicting patterns in the brain to be modeled as a part of the environment rather than the subject, this would match both the experimental observations and our subjective experience of ego depletion.
It is interesting to speculate to what degree a macroscopic agent’s experience of executive function differs from the reality of a particle being in superposition. Although there is certainly a useful metaphor to be drawn, the connection between the two may in fact be quite literal, and based on the same dynamics. Recall that as scale increases, though the likelihood of being observed increases, the likelihood of being observed completely decreases. Traditional versions of quantum mechanics like the Copenhagen interpretation treat the quantum-classical distinction as purely binary [3] while modern interpretations like QBism allow for allow for a more ‘partial’ measure of collapse [4]. If we allow for sch “partial” quantum behaviour in our model, we would expect larger complex objects to exhibit it, since surface area increases less quickly than volume in relation to scale. This effect would naturally be more pronounced for four-dimensional processes than three-dimensional objects. And in fact, the field of quantum biology gives some indication that life depends on quantum effects in multiple ways [5]. 
There is a straightforward way in which the human sense of interroception and memory could be a factor in how decoherence occurs: if internal states are recorded in memory, thy may become available for something in the environment to observe after they have occurred. Mechanisms to adjust this dynamic – of which flow state may be one – would be expected to have evolved and presumably still be evolving. 
There is so much controversy around the capacity for autonomous action that it is probably easier to model what executive function does than what it is. Suppose ego depletion is in fact transition energy being expanded to alter the likelihoods of the associated holon’s boundary states. In this case the simplest mechanism underlying this energy expenditure would be the breakdown of separation between the self and the environment. This seems a reasonable first approximation from the viewpoint of a data model like Tononi’s as well, since an individual consciousness according to that model is one that can integrate more data internally than across its boundary with the rest of the universe. In this model, communication between the complex and its environment would lead to mutual change, but the more such communication occurs the more data can be integrated across its boundary, eliminating the distinctiveness of its subjective experience and presumably its capacity for individual preference. To sum up, we make the following proposals:
1. Quantum coherence of a system from the perspecective of another system is energy in the formal sense, it is a difference across a boundary which can power a change of state, and
2. The executive function of agents at a human scale is an example of this energy, with different dynamics due to difference of scale. Ego depletion is this scale’s equivalent of entropy increasing due to wave function collapse (we are here using the thermodynamic meaning of entropy as energy too diffuse to access for a purpose rather than the information theory sense of entropy as uncertainty – the latter would in this case be decreasing from the perspective of the environment)
This proposal appears at odds with most people’s subjective experience unless the model allows separate neural systems to interfere with one another at some times but not others. When a single person has conflicting motivations, the loci of these respective drives are forced to interact whenever the subject of their disagreement is present.
Consider the classic example of a person seeking to overcome a substance addiction. On part of the personality is motivated to avoid the substance in question while another is motivated to seek it out. The subject will be successful in changing their habit so long as the ‘avoiding’ portion of their psyche has more energy than the ‘seeking’ portion. When multiple portions of the psyche grapple with the same problem, communication between them naturally increases.
Tononi calls these internal divisions ‘complexes’ and speculates that their separation is a function of how much information is exchanged between versus within them. As more information is exchanged between versus within them. As more information is exchanged, these division reduce, and less energy is available o make a change – however, this energy typically leads to a new default mode of operation, using aspects of both previously conflicting patterns.
The connection between quantum field effects and the subjective experience of marshalling willpower is most straightforward within the context of a flow experience. Consciousness and the duration of the flow state are both a single holon. The person experiencing the flow state experiences the entire episode as one observation and one decision. Experiencing the entire process as one unit allows working towards the desired outcome for its entire duration. As for what the desired state will be at the outset, the model already begins to get strange here. During a flow state, the subjective experience is typically one of simply ‘witnessing’ without expanding energy on making decisions at all. However, to enter a flow state at all requires not just high stakes but a high level of domain knowledge. Volition, then, seems to need to be readily available in two forms for flow to occur: On a large scale, in that the outcome must be of obvious import, and a small scale, in that domain knowledge must be sufficient that no individual decision in service to the overarching goal is particularly difficult.
Penrose and Hameroff’s as well as Tononi’s models of consciousness posit an interiority to bounded regions, with subjective experience an intrinsic quality of this interiority and objective facts an intrinsic feature of their shared borders. Temporal holonics begins with these presuppositions and specifically considers them in four dimensions. This implies the scale of the experience – and therefore the consciousness experiencing it – varies not just with the three-dimensional extent of the substrate’s boundary, but its bounded region across three spatial and one temporal dimension. Quantum mechanics, with its existing concepts of superposition, entanglement, and decoherence, provies a convenient language for modelling bounded regions in or of spacetime. A key feature of this model is that while the states at the boundary of such a region can be known, the internal particulars are not only unknowable, but exhibit very different behaviour than would be predicted from observing only sequences of boundary states.
The fact that subjective consciousness is associated with the interiority of holons of this nature further complicates the final model. There is evidence of consciousness having measurable effects on random events, with larger quantities of consciousness having greater effects [6] [7]. As these studies relate to consciousness having effects outside the brains of the subjects, they could be described as investigating holons which include humans. By Tononi’s model, we might say these studies relate to holons where the greatest bottleneck to information integration is between humans and the rest of the holon. These studies are relevant for two reasons: they indicate a possible mechanism for consciousness to effect change as our subjective experience using willpower implies it does, and they indicate that ‘more’ consciousness, whether coherent across space or time, has more extreme effects. 
This may have some relevance to how willpower relates to the temporal holonics theory. It has been suggested that humans are unusual among animals because of our felicity at taking not just our present but our future wellbeing into account when making decisions – that is to say, our capacity for delayed gratification. The ability to use memory to inform behaviour for immediate wellbeing exists elsewhere in the animal kingdom. The ability to balance immediate against future wellbeing however, is only partially present even in humans. Indeed, much of the research around ego depletion engages with the difficulty humans have balancing short-term against long-term gain. Under the theory proposed here, the degree to which an individual can prioritise long-term benefits corresponds to how long of a time frame they are able to maintain coherence over. One prediction this theory offers is that familiarity with flow states would correspond to a greater ability to exercise self-control in a ‘marshmallow test’ [8] scenario, since both entering flow states and prioritizing long-term benefits over short-term would relate to extending coherence across the temporal dimension. 
Part one of this book presented the hypothesis that a holon can extend through time as well asspace, that flow states are an example of holons etended through time, and the unusual results flow sates allow are the result oflarger holons having more potential boundary states. 
Tononi’s and Radin’s research both point to an interesting connection in the context of this model. Ononi, in seeking to solve the hard problem of consciousness, begins with a mathematical model of neural networks and finds that a region’s abiity to integrate moreinformation internally than it can communicate corresponds to its having subjective experience, with the amount of information integrated corresponding to the reliability of consciousness being present. Radin, seeking to explore certain straing results at the intersection of psychology and physics, began at the opposite end – ositive subjective attention as a given, he found that certain phenomena sometimes called ‘spooky action at a distance’intensify with the amount of subjective attention present, both via number of observers and intensity of focus [9][10]. 
Taken together, these results point to a conclusion that seems obvious from our everyday experience: subjective consciousness can affect the universe, and the 4D hypervolume of the holon having the experience corresponds to the impact it can have. The method to move effectively between existing and desired end states may be as simple as maximizing the extent of the subjective consciousness which prevers the given end state. There are multiple means to achieve this:
-maximising the amount of neural subregions which have the preference and attention.
-maximising the time during which the subjective experience is coherent
Both these strategies can lead to a 'larger' holon and therefore 'more' willpower. 
Verious means of achieving these ends have already been widely promulgated in pop-psychology. Some of the more obvious include visualising the desired outcome (which we would expect to 'spread' the desire across more neural subregions), associating with people who share the same goals (which would add additional ego involvement in a different way), training attention span (which would increase th length of time a particular goal can be focused on), or the various means of gaining self-knowledge (which would allow subregions of the individual to communicate and therefore 'share' subregions across multiple goals more efficiently).
Another prediction temporal Holongics can offer here is that increasing time to decoherence would significantly increase the effects of the coherent mind having the experience. Recall from our paper on flow that time to decoherence is not an absolute quantity, with some information about a larger subject becoming more easily available, and some remaining obscure for longer. 
Focus, a key component of flow, could well be one means of extending relaxation time. The portions of the brain that model an environment and how to complete a task, by engaging the executive function, are required to ignore a lot of input [11].
This includes input from other neural regions as well as sensory input not relevant to the task at hand. this deliverate avoidance of interactions that do not serfe the subject's narrowed focus would be consistent with a model of execution where the energy to move between states with few potential connections requires maintaining some degree of privacy. 
Applied willpower requires several of these features, involving a narrowing of the worldview and either assimilating noncompeting goals or dropping competing ones. The basic model presented here is of instances of psychological flow allowing more degrees of freedom because their content are a single temporal holon with far more action potential than the sum of several smaller holons. The neural tendency to stop orienting in time during these experiences while still enjoying high predictive power speaks to this model's robustness. Research like Tononi's and Radin's links these 'large holon' experiences to subjective consciousness directed in a consistent way can affect the outcome of quantum processes.
Up to now, this model has only been used to analyze individual, temporally localized holons. there is much interest in how an individual can most effectively pursue a long-term goal since such goals require far more time than it is possible to maitnain a single flow experience over, this model is not directly applicable to such questions. However, it may provide insight into the building blocks that would make up an effective method. 
In order to analyse such dynamics, we must take a closer look at the idea of nested holons. This idea is an integral part of the concept of a holon. In a classic example, proteins are holons inside cells which are holons inside organs which are holons inside humans which are holons inside social groups... it is obvious from this example that holons are everywhere, and that almost all can easily be subdivided or integrated into smaller or larger holons. 
What is missing from this traditional analysis is that holons are not confined to three dimensions - in fact if Oeckl's 'General Boundary' [12] interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct then holons may in fact be not 'just' metaphysical constructs but physical realities, albeit primarily four-dimensional holons with three-dimensional surfaces, unlike the three dimensional holons with two dimensional surfaces we are accustomed to experiencing. 
It is in this four-dimensional realm that all human competance takes place, even though human experience seems limited to three dimensions [12][13]. Despite this limitation, it should be possible to conceptualise the nature of embedded actions as they relate to human experience. 
To be successful at a complex task, specialization in sub-tasks is often helpful - this allows greater flexibility when different challenges share some aspects. However, integration of information relates to intensity of experience - if a longer task can be subdivided into subgoals and the neural regions specialized for these are fairly independent - that is, if variation in the state of one doesn't lead to much variation in the others - then the intensity of consciousness pursuing the metagoal will be reduced and consequently, so will the intensity of its willpower. 
A delicate weave must therefore be achieved: sufficient focus must be brought to each subgoal that the individual 'steps' on the path to victory are arrived at & recognized as such. However, they must also be integrated inside a greater temporal holon. Within this holon they must be capable of exchanging information with the rest of the potential states comprising it, not only offering context to the rest of the holon but changing depending on the context they exist inside of. 
Properly engaging in this weave depends on knowing the appropriate relaxation time of the subgoals wehre the benefits of the movement towards the goal being a holon - transition energy being free to use across a larger probability stpace - are not disrupted by too many factors from outside the probability space of the outcome. this is highlighted by the concept of 'monotasking', to which many prolific people ascribe large amounts of their success. focusing all one's attention on a single task until it is finished (or some predetermined quantity is finished) before engaging with another. This intensity of focus allows a great deal of probability to coexist while the person in question engages with the subject. However, if the work is embedded within a wider context - doing a job well being embedded in a career for instance - then some interaction between the various subtasks in service of an overarching goal is to be expected. The neural architecture devoted to the larger goal, when extended through time, is to be expected. The neural architecture devoted to the larger goal, when extended through time, is necessarily more diffuse than that of the sub goals. However, it is necessarily also larger. this dynamic presumably exists at every level of organisation. How much information to exchange is therefore a crucial question about architecture pursuing a sub-goal.
'Slow is smooth and smooth is fast' is a popular piece of folk wisdom. Within the context of a question about ideal holon-span, it is rather telling. "Smoothness" is clearly a function of individual tasks being integrated into the whole, implying that a longer stretch of temporal holon is preferable, allowing fewer internal interruptions. Similar principles around minimizing handoffs and interruptions are emphasized in lean six sigma methodology [14]. A similar dynamic is presumably at play between different neural regions, with a single, well - integrated architecture being more effective even than more optimized subregions that are not as well-integrated. A core skill the temporal holonics model predicts would be useful is the ability to seamlessly integrate nuanced information across 'larger' holons. 
However, some processes are too large to do this in a straightfoward manner. Certain projects may benefit from larger individual 'chunks' without being possible to complete in a single session. 
When distances are spatial, we take for granted that there may be 'gaps' between parts of a holon. Entangled particles, separated by a significant distance, are obviously still a part of the same holon. The copenhagen interpretation tells us that when entangled particles are separated in space, observing one 'collapses' the wave-function of the other 'instantaneously'. However, experiments like the quantum eraser have demonstrated that a particle's wave form collapses not 'instantaneously', but more accurately 'retroacitvely', along the entirety of its transition, not merely the 'edge' where an observation takes place.
Given these distinctions, can we concieve of a temporal holon that is not concentrated in a single temporal locality, much as entangled ansd separated partilces are setpoints of a holon not concetrated in a single physical locality? would a long creative project, to which the creator returns periodically, interspersed bh periods of rest and other duties qualify?
By the model presented here, the answer to that question depends a great deal on the interactions between these individual work sessions and the periods in between. The temporal holonics model deals with superposition not as an absolute but a relative quality, with larger holons having less extreme but longer-lasting quantum effects. The rate at which the energy potential of superposition states dissipates into its environment is variable, depending on more factors the larger a holon is. 
One phenomenon this model would explain is the reluctance of many artists to show unfinished work to the public. Rather than mere perfectionism and embarrasment at showing off incomplete work, this behaviour could be a defense against premature wave-function collapse. Limiting interactions between the incomplete work and the rest of the universe would allow the probability-space bordering the work to expand, thus increasing the quality of the best work that could possibly be produced.
Within the context of an individual work-session, two questions arise: What the ideal length of holon to 'aim' for is, and precisely how one 'aims' for the 'best' of the observable 3D possibilities 'touched' by the 4D holon describing the movement between an initial and one of many possible subsequent states. 
On the latter question, a model such as Tononi's would posit that the holon itself is consciousness experiencing the transition, more concentrated consciousness (which may or may not be distincty from a certainty that a given outcome is preferred by that instance of consciousness) as well as the relative probability of a given outcome, should both be relevant to the likelihood of a given desired outcome being achieved.
Bringing more consciousness to bear on a given problem is the obvious way to achieve a desired result. According to Tononi's model this would have two components: That a large neural region is dedicated to navigating the probability-space, and that a lot of information is exchanged internally to this neural region. Extending the coherence of the neural region through time increases the chances for both to happen. There is one wrinkle however - the region cannot be so large that there is internal disagreement over the 'best' outcome to the transition; this would necessitate internal observation and therefore make it impossible to maintain a coherent holon across a long timespan. All such internal disagreements should therefore be addressed before the subject can expect to do their best work, which may explain why periods of high performance seem to require periods of struggle combined with rest and relaxation [15].
A second practical question arises around the ideal time to spend in a single holon. Some studies have indicated that flow is most likely to occur when a subject is required to perform at 104% of a previous best [15]. A useful experiment would therefore be to determine the maximum time a subject can reliably spend "navigating" a single holon and attempt to exceed that time by 4%. 
One difficulty of designing such an experiment would lie with the fact that "sustaining" a single holon is not a binary measurement in the model presented here. Coherence on the scale of a neural region will likely always be partial from the point of view of a human investigator. Determining whether a particular holon is coherent enough to result in a flow experience is therefore the first challenge to solve. 
A subsequent challenge is that the two components of bringing more consciousness to bear on a single challenge have somewhat competing prerequisites. The larger a neural region is, the more potential consciousness is associated with it. However, a larger region is more likely to have internal regions across which little information can be integrated - the 'intensiyt' of a larger neural region's consciousness would therefore be expected to be lower. Prioritizing the amount or intensity of consciousness therefore seems related to the brain's 'Diffuse' and 'Focused' modes [16].
This may be a consistent difference, not just between focused or diffuse neural regions in a single subject, but neural regions of larger versus smalle rsubjects. Smaller organisms consistently detect and react to stimuli across shorter spans of time than larger animals [17]. This finding is consistent with the model of an agent as the consciousness within a 4D holon whose decoherence time is determined in large part by the size of the agent, 


Bibliography
[1] Baumeister, R.J., Bratlavsky, E., Muravan, M (1998) “Ego Depletion: Is the Active Self a Limited Resource?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74(5) 1252-1265
 [2] Lange, F, and Eggert, F, (2014) “Sweet delusion: Glucose drinks fail to counteract ego depletion” Appetite Volume 75, pages 54-63 
[3] Faye, J. (2019) “Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
[4] Timpson, C. (2008) “Quantum Bayesianism: A Study” Studies in history and philosophy of science part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
[5] Kim, Y. Et Al (2021) “Quantum Biology: An Update and Perspective” Quantum Reports 3, 1-48
[6] Radin, D & Nelson, R (1989) “Evidence for consciousness-related anomalies in random physical systems” Foundations of physics 19, 1499-1514
[7] Radin, D. Patterson, R. and Mason, L. (2007) “Exploratory Study: The Random Number Generator and Group Meditation” Journal of Scientific Exploration Vol 21, No 2, p295-317
[8] Mischel, W, (2015) “The marshmallow test: Why self-control is the engine of success” Academia.edu
[9] Radin, D.I., Nelson, R.D. (1989) “Evidence for consciousness-related anomalies in random physical systems” Found Phys 19, 1499–1514. 
[10] Radin, D., Michel, L., Galdamez, K., Wendland, P., Rickenbach, R. and Delorme, A., (2012). “Consciousness and the double-slit interference pattern: Six experiments” Physics Essays, 25(2), p.157.
[11]1.Mohapel P. "The neurobiology of focus and distraction: The case for incorporating mindfulness into leadership". Healthcare Management Forum. 2018;31(3):87-91. doi:10.1177/0840470417746414
[12] Penrose, Roger (1989). “Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness”. Oxford University Press.
[13] Cabello, Adan (2017), “Interpretations of Quantum Theory: A Map of Madness”, Cambridge University Press
[14] Hartman, Ben (2015), "The Lean Farm: How to Minimize Waste, Increase Efficiency, and Maximize Value and Profits with Less Work" Chelsea Green Publishing
[15] Kotler, Steven (2015), "The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance", Quercus Publishing
[16] Oakley, Barbera (2018), "Learning How to Learn: How to Succeed in School Without Spending All Your Time Studying; A Guide for Kids and Teens", TarcherPerigee
[17] Rospars, Jean-Pierre and Meyer-Vernet, Nicole (2021) "How fast do mobile organisms respond to stimuli? Response times from bacteria to elephants and whales" Physical Biology, Volume 18, Number 2
